.. slug: stock-rom-v-3067083-for-htc-butterfly-s
.. link: 
.. tags: android, kitkat, htc, butterfly s, rom
.. date: 2014/03/19 23:50:06
.. description: 
.. title: Stock ROM v. 3.06.708.3 for HTC Butterfly S

Today I released a flashable ZIP of the latest stock KitKat 4.4.2 ROM for
the HTC Butterfly S. To download the thing, head over to the `thread at
XDA Developers`_. Read on if you want to find out more about why it took
me so long and what my impressions of the system are so far.

.. TEASER_END

The update was released for the Hong Kong version of the phone (which is
the one I own) nearly two weeks ago, which means it took me quite some
time to get this out. One of the reasons is that Zarboz beat me to it and
released a ZIP before I found the time to dig into this myself. That's why
it slipped somewhat lower on my TODO list.

However, it's been brought to my attention that the ZIP in question is not
completely stock since it contains some flavor of Superuser preinstalled.
My releases, on the other hand, are completely vanilla without
modifications of any kind.

That's why I decided to finally get this out of the way this Tuesday.

Making of the installer
-----------------------

The first complication appeared while I was trying to apply the OTA update
to a stock, unmodded system on the previous version. I installed the stock
recovery from the previous update and let it install the OTA. It rebooted
and... got stuck while booting the system. Weird colors on the screen and
it just hung.

So I tried again, but this time I selected the update ZIP manually in the
recovery in order to see the messages it prints. It failed on
``set_metadata_recursive`` -- it was trying to set extended capabilities
and SELinux labels on certain files. The stock recovery from 2.21.708.1,
however, doesn't support these kinds of metadata. Solution? Install the
recovery from the update I was trying to apply and try again -- went just
fine.

I have no idea how the update is supposed to work on locked unmodded
phones, but whatever. Or maybe I just installed an older version of the
recovery by mistake... No idea and I'm not curious enough to investigate
this further.

Making the ZIP installer was another challenge. At first, I just took the
installer from 2.21.708.1, replaced the files, updated the description,
copied additional metadata commands from the OTA installer, built the
package and tried to install.

It failed, of course.

The problem was that I was using an ``update-binary`` I found somewhere on
the XDA forums (don't recall where) and it looks like it is some old
version which doesn't support the new ``set_metadata`` and
``set_metadata_recursive`` functions. The easiest thing for me to do was
to just take the ``update-binary`` from the official OTA package.

This, however, broke the installation of ``boot.img``. Butterfly S doesn't
have any MTD partitions, its storage is accessed as EMMC. The problem is,
in the upstream version of the installer, ``write_raw_image`` can only
write images to MTD partitions, not EMMC. The old version of the binary I
was using previously must have been patched to support EMMC as well.

Luckily, just calling ``dd`` to write the image to
``/dev/block/mmcblk0p36``, which is the ``boot`` partition on the
Butterfly S, seems to work fine.

The only remaining problem is that none of the builds of TWRP that are
available at the moment support filesystem capabilities and SELinux
labels, which means the ``set_metadata`` calls will fail when trying to
set them. From what I've read, only CWM Touch 6.0.4.5 is recent enough to
support the metadata, but the only build available doesn't support the
external SD.

I could always make two versions of the ROM, one for recoveries with
support for these kinds of metadata and one for recoveries without the
support, but I'm not a big fan of that. Instead, I modified the installer
to first set the regular metadata that works everywhere and only try to
set the extended metadata as the very last step of the installation
process.

If the metadata isn't supported, it should be OK, the installation will
fail, but everything should be safely in place at that point. If it is
supported, there's no problem at all. Either way, you end up with a
working stock system, only the installer might fail, but you can safely
ignore that.

So yeah, that's a short version of the story; in reality, it took me a lot
more attempts to flesh out stupid mistakes but these were the biggest
issues I encountered. Consider that it takes about 15 minutes to build the
ZIP and push it to the device and then I had to wait for it to finish
unpacking just to see where it failed... Well, it was tedious.

My impressions of the 4.4.2 system
----------------------------------

I've been using the new system for about a day and a half and my
impressions are mixed so far.

The nicest feature I noticed about the update is the ability to bring up
the notification bar even in full-screen apps. It also turns some of the
notification area icons (notably, the battery indicator) to
black-and-white which is okay, I guess; it makes the overall look somewhat
more consistent with the general monochromatic theme.

However, a big issue seems to be the battery drain. After I finished
tuning the ROM installer, my phone was most certainly fully charged.
Within 11 hours of medium usage, the battery level was down to about 10%,
which is much worse than on my old HTC Desire after three years of service
with the original battery.

Today, it appears to have performed a tiny bit better, after a full day it
is at 32%. I guess I'll try to give the system a week to settle (I know
the Android system needs some time to make statistics in order to optimize
memory and process management), but if things don't improve significantly,
I'm afraid I'll have to revert back to 4.3.

.. _thread at XDA Developers:
   http://forum.xda-developers.com/showthread.php?t=2422783
